---
title: Copy Repository From Tag
category: thoughts
tags: git github
toc: false
---
If you've been following the [guided tour]({% link _pages/guided.md %}) in order then you already have the code you need. But if you're dropping into an individual service or procedure, you'll need to get that particular code on your computer.<!--more-->

You could just clone from the {{ site.data.fake.company_name }} GitHub repositories, but that code changes overtime and may be newer than the procedure you're working on. To facilitate this, I create a Git [tag](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Tagging) for each service so that you can get the exact code demonstrated. This post shows you how to download or clone the specific tagged version of the repository.

You'll need one or more of the following values. These values will be displayed at the top or right side of each service.

|Value|Method|Description|
|-----|------|-----------|
|Tag URL|[Download](#download)|This URL will take you to the page where you can download a compressed version of the tagged repo.|
|Repo URL|[Clone](#clone)|This is the URL of repository that you'll be cloning.|
|Tag Name|[Clone](#clone)|This is the tag of the repository that you wish to clone.|

## Download

The easiest way is to download the source code directly without using Git. Go to the tag URL and download one of the zip files and extract it to your preferred location.

After that, create a new local Git repository by typing the following command in the folder where you extracted the source code. This is optional, but will make your life easier.

``` shell
git init
```

## Clone

Another way is to use the `git clone` command to clone the specific tag of the repository to your computer. Here are the commands, and I'll explain what's going on below.

``` shell
git clone --branch <repo URL> <tag name>
cd <tag name>
git checkout -b main
```

- The first `git clone` command will copy the repository to your computer. The `--branch` parameter tells Git to grab the code from the commit identified by the `<tag name>` tag. If you omit the `--branch` parameter, Git will grab the most recent code in the main branch. You'll probably see a warning message, which I'll explain below.
- The second command simply changes the directory into the newly created *tag name* folder. (I always, always forget to `cd` into the new folder in all the years I've been doing this.)
- The last `git checkout` command will create a new branch named *main*. When you clone from a tag/branch/commit, it will create what's known as a **detached head**. Gruesome, I know, but since you cloned a tag, not a branch, there is no branch to reference. Creating a new branch will give you a named branch to work on.

If you're just screwing around locally, you don't need to do anything else. Don't worry about accidentally pushing changes to my repo. You don't have permission so it won't work.

If you want to push your code up to own repository, there's a few ways to do that, but here's the most straightforward way.

1. Create a new repository in your preferred Git provider (e.g., GitHub, Azure DevOps, BitBucket).
1. Run commands below.

``` shell
git remote set-url origin <URL of your new repo>
git push -u origin main
```

This will change your remote from my repo to yours, then push the code up to your repo.